<MKL 13Mar2019>

\textbf{TGW: networks as evolved traits.}
\textbf{MKL: is lichen plural?}

This is the first study to conduct an examination of how evolutionary
dynamics can impact the architecture of ecological networks at a scale
relevant to microevolutionary processes in a natural
ecosystem. Previous work consists of Joe's work, Art's work, Dave's
work, Hal Mooney's work, Thompson Lab (Japanese collaborator,
Guimaraes). \textit{In silico} simulations of evolutionary dynamics of
networks has been done as well, and although such studies provide a
way to study novel evolutionary systems (e.g. Fortuna 2014), this
work is highly abstracted from real ecosystems. 


\textbf{LJL: I think a key point in the first paragraph is to point
  out that networks are believe in part to emerge out of complex
  evolutionary interactions. But, to-date, the patterns observed in
  networks are primarily only on the scale of species interactions and
  phylogenetic signature. There has yet to be much work connecting
  ecological species networks at the scale relevant to the actual
  workings of microevolutionary processes (e.g., the genotype or
  population level).}

This is the first study of its kind to include replicated networks
associated with individual tree genotypes, providing a powerful tool
for observing the effects of genetically based traits of individual
trees on the networks of associated communities.

\textbf{LJL: I think the thing that needs to emerge in this paragraph
  is that even though there is some incling that genotype is relevant
  in community networks, as based on our few past studies, no study
  has truely examined networks on individual trees.}

I'll add the natural stand trees to the figure and a sentence to the
results and the discussion stating the results.

\textbf{You mention the naturally established stand but then that data
  doesn’t get included in the manuscript. I do like the idea of
  including the field data. We might need to cross reference IDs of
  the lichens in my community composition data on the same trees since
  there was considerably more diversity than we initially saw out
  there. We would just want to make sure the same names are applied to
  taxa in the same quatrats on each tree. It probably wouldn’t take
  long.}

I'll add the JoE paper to the discussion of community genetics. I'll
also add the Des Roches paper to the same paragraph, along with the
Barker paper. I've removed the Elamo paper citation.

\textbf{LJL: If I recall, the Elamo paper just looks at genetic
  correlations between pairwise individual abundances. I would suggest
  maybe it doesn’t deserve to be in this 1st paragraph. Perhaps it
  actually should be in the 2nd or 3rd paragraph, just as a reference
  that points to the potential for genotype to influence
  networks. Definately our 2015 JOE paper goes much further, too,
  since it has whole communities being correlationed. But, again, I
  woudl put both of these as citation in the community genetics
  paragraphs (2 of 3) instead of the first paragrpah, which focuses on
  the general network lit.}



\textbf{LJL: 
I agree that there is a general overarching theme that evolution
occurs in a community network context, but I’m not sure that we should
state that as our main hypothesis. It seems more that this is a
fundamental foundation for our work. The hypothesis is more what we
are testing directly, but we don’t test this directly.

I guess I don’t want to give the impresison that our communities are
necessarily the result of each species evolving into its place in the
community on these tree genotypes (although I do understand this as
Shuster et al 2006’s fundamental explanation for why we see different
communities on different genotypes; I don’t necessarily agree that
this is the only reason we woudl see different communities on dif
genotypes). Most of these are pretty generalist lichens, which could
be found on other decidous trees in the surounding city or natural
areas. I would look at it more like an assembling of lichen species
into unique configurations on genetically different substrates. There
may be some selection for different genotype of lichen during the
community assembly process but we can’t really tell that just by
differences in species abundances or coocurneces.

I guess to me the evolutionary context that is more direclty related
to this work is that the tree genotype is a central controller (indeed
a sort of hub species in the network) of network structure. By
anchoring the lichen network to tree genotype (and variation among
networks to variation among tree genotypes) , our study highlights the
possibility that natural selection acting on the trees may have an
extended consequence for the network structure of organisms living on
the trees…the extra thing we add to the field is that we show
interaction networks are sensitive to genotype. I doubt the lichens
have a direct effect on tree fitness, but favorability of some tree
genotypes over others during natural selection will then go on to
favor and disfavor certain lichen communities of different network
structures. By being sensitive to tree genotype, the lichen community
networks are passive riders on the waves of evolutionary dynamics that
occur within the tree species they inhabit.}
\textbf{MKL: In response to Lamit's comment above, I agree that it is
  not reuqired that there is co-evolution. Another, perhaps simpler,
  explanation is that there is variation in environmental filtering of
  lichen individuals created in part by genetic variation in tree
  individuals.}
\textbf{MKL: Need to add more citations of Lamits or other lichen
  studies.}
\textbf{LJL: If you include the field data, I would suggest changing
  the topic sentence for this paragraph and adding something about the
  field data sampling to this paragrpah. Note, also that we cored and
  aged each field tree so we can site the age range of the trees here,
  to make it clear they are within those of the garden.}
\textbf{LJL: The topic sentence here makes it seem like only one
  quadrat grid was sampled. Maybe do not include the grid size here
  but instead just make a general statement of the sampling in a
  checkerboard in two quadrats, then go on to explain in detail.}
\textbf{LJL: A total pain in the butt but it might be good just to
  double check that our exact species that occured in each quadrat are
  the same as the species that I found in the composition data. No
  doubt that I woudl have foudn more species but it might be a good
  double check of things just to see if they roughly correspond. I can
  do this if you send me your matrix.}
\textbf{LJL: I think this sentence is good and these lichens tend to
  be ones that were rarer or really easy to miss. So, the list of
  species you picked up sounds logit to me. One thing… above you say
  14 species but only 9 were found. That is a bit redundant with this
  next sentence that highlights which species were found and which
  were not obsered. I would just stick with the second sentence and
  delete the first sentence.}
\textbf{LJL: My method was overal visual \% cover. I didn’t count P/A
  of rough bark in each square. So, yo might just want to site our
  Ecology lichen paper as showing rough bark is important, but not
  cite it as the same method. No doubt the methods should yeild
  similar results but the approach is slightly different.}
\textbf{LJL: This seems like a key point, one that really makes the
  study above and beyond.  I would make it clear with the phrasing
  that individual networks were created for each individual tree
  sampled, in this way we had replicated networks for each tree
  genotypes.}
\textbf{MKL: regarding Lamit's question about the symmetry, the point
  is that direction of the interaction matters. The effect of species
  A on B can be different from B on A. No the matrix is not
  necessarily triangular (triangular being that the matrix either
  above or below the diagonal is completely zero).}
\textbf{LJL: This approach seems legit and it sound
  impressive. However, I admit that I think it is a bit above my head
  and possibly Tom’s, too. I have no doubt you did everything
  correct. But, it might be wise to get a friendly review from a mathy
  person just to be on the safe side. Perhaps Stuart in NC, or Aaron
  Ellison.}
\textbf{MKL: agreed. This seems like a job for Bowker or Stuart. They
  can take a look on the next round of reviews.}
\textbf{LJL: I like the details here. THe one thing is that it sort of
  makes the reader think there is only one quadrat on a tree but
  infact there were two. I think you want to make sure to be explicit
  about the two. For analytical purposes, was all the data lumped so
  there was really functionally a 20cm by 10cm grid (just split into
  two pieces). Or, was the network made for each of the two grids and
  them averaged or combined in some way? My understanding is that it
  was more the first than the latter.}
\textbf{MKL: Yeah, it was the latter. I'm using two quadrats lumped
  together. I'll add more text here to clarify that.}
\textbf{LJL: Was data for the networks relativized, too?  THis
  paragraph seems to merge what was done with the networks and what
  was done to test basic composition with relative abundances. I think
  it would be important for clarity sake to seperate them into two
  paragraphs. Have one about testing composition and one for testing
  networks. Along those lines, you can mere the NMDS stuf below into
  each of these paragrpahs were relavant. Keeping them seperate would
  make it clearer to the reader.}
\textbf{In particular, we do not present analysis of the
  modularity (i.e. the degree of sub-grouping) because our community
  has relatively few species to form modules.}
\textbf{LJL: I suggest deleting the highlighted part. And, just
  changing the sentence above it to “...because some metric (e.g.,
  modularity) are not appropriate...”  Too much emphasis on caviots
  will make some readers be uncertain. But, also, you can save some
  space that way.}
\textbf{MKL: for all figures 1) increase line width, 2) make axis
  labels bold, 3) increase clarity of vectors and labels.}
\textbf{LJL: Figure looks good. But, maybe making all lines a little
  thicker would look nicer and pop more.}
\textbf{LJL: Since we already published that tree genotypes differ in
  lichen composition, I wonder if we need to say somewhere in the
  manuscript why this test was run here. It seems to me it is
  important to verify this with a slightly different sampling method
  as used int eh 2015 paper, and for this specific set of
  genotypes. But, then does this test of composition just become
  something necessary just in a methodological variation that
  justifies the next step of examing network structure.  Something to
  think about. It might be that theNMDS should jsut go in a
  supplement, although I do like it here in some ways.  It might also
  be another approach to put the composition and other analyses after
  the network analysis results are presented. In this way, you could
  use the composition and results with vectors to help provide
  resolution on what is driving networks to differ among genotypes.}
\textbf{MKL: Adapt into a table.}
\textbf{TGW: clarify positive vs negative interactions.}
\textbf{LJL: It seems to me that the first two sentences here are the
  most important of the results. How can you make them stand out more?
  Maybe also they should go at the begining of the previous paragrpah,
  and then move that paragraph to being the first in the REsults
  section.}
\textbf{TGW: Here and in earlier paragraphs, a lot of stats are
  presented some of which are significant and some not.  For your
  topic sentence to be accepted, it seems readers need to know how
  many of the stats need to confirm the pattern and how many would it
  take to reject.  This paragraph has about 8 stats so need some
  overarching statement(s).  E.g., 7 of 8 analyses support our
  overarching hypothesis that ...  Same goes for other such paragraphs
  such as the 1st and last paras of the Results.}
\textbf{LJL:  
I’m not sure about saying roughnes partially explained. Its
correlation went away after controlling for genotype. Doesn’t that
mean that the correlation is related to something else that is
associated with genotype, and not roughness per se?

I have bark condensed tannin data that might be interesting to explore
as a mechanism.  I could also measure pH on the bark pieces that I
have. I think you collected them awhile ago and they have been air
dried, so pH should be fine to meausre. pH is often correlated to bark
texture in epiphyte studies, so it might be driving things.}
\textbf{TGW: I think window is too vague and this topic sentence needs
  to be much stronger for a journal like PNAS.  Might be stronger by
  saying "Our findings argue there is a genetic component to network
  structure, which implies that network structure could be subject to
  selection and networks can evolve."}
\textbf{TGW: Could we also make the comparsion that genetically more
  similar trees also have more similar communities?  We've done this
  in the past and it has worked, e.g., Randy's genetic similarity
  rule.}
\textbf{LJL: 
I wonder if you need to have so much on richness here. 

Overall, I think you want to focus on the network reponses and
patterns among genotype first, and then go into mechanism later. I
think we don’t quite have a good mechanism yet so I don’t think it
needs to come up in the first paragrpah of the discussion.}
\textbf{LJL:  
It could be useful to point out that our findings are
  not related to trophic interactions, which is pretty cool.

Also,we talk about interaction networks but it is not clear to me if
the interactions tend to be positive or negative. Can we get at that
with the approach used? }
\textbf{TGW:  Is there any adaptive component to the tree in having
  certain lichen communities?  e.g., can they feed back to affect tree
  performance in some way or is this a passive outcome of a trait that
  affects bark for other adaptive reasons and lichens are passive
  players that tag along for the ride?  I could envision that lichens
  covering the bark of a tree act as a barrier between insects and
  pathogens, much like ectomycorrhizae cover fine roots as a first
  line of defense by invading microorganisms.  Uptake of N that gets
  passed to the tree??}
\textbf{TGW: might be good to cite papers on competition in lichens or
  other organizing factors to back up the least expected statement.
  as epiphytes we might not expect them to care.}
\textbf{TGW: I think we need to emphasize the long-term nature of our
  common garden study as very few common garden studies of lichens
  likely exist. Any refs on this? If true might want to mention this
  up front in intro.}
\textbf{MKL: Environmental filtering is evidenced by species richness,
  but also possibly species interaction varying based on environment
  as networks varied in terms of sign and magnitude as well.}
\textbf{MKL: The effect of bark roughness on network similarity was
  primarily genetically based, and there are likely other factors at
  play.}
\textbf{Discussion of network implications for stability with genetics.}
\textbf{TGW: I know you commented about not talking about H2 in the
  text, but since you have the data, why not?  All heritability
  findings only apply for the environment or common garden they were
  measured in as does the rest of the findings presented in this
  paper.}



<MKL 05March2019>

Finalize the following edits with Lamit and Tom, then send to co-auths
and Rodolfo Dirzo (pre-edit).

<LJL 05March2019>

Hey Matt, attached are my comments on the paper. They are in little
comment boxes where relevant. Let me know if you need any
clarification. I think the paper is looking really cool, and that it
has a lot of potential to make a big impact.

A couple things:

1) Do you want to add in bark chemistry data? I have condensed tannin
data that I included in my 2011 lichen paper. It didn’t correlate with
X. Galericulata abundance but I never utilized it in the 2015 paper to
see if it had a relationship with the full community. I can easily
send you that data. I have it for just about every tree in the north
garden so it should overlap with your trees completely.  Also, bark pH
often correlated with Roughness (at least among tree species). Since
the effects of roughness on the network seemed to dissipate when
controlling for tree genotype, it seems that something else related to
genotype and correlated with roughness is driving the genotype network
effects. I have the dried bark sample that you collected a long time
ago and I should be able to measure pH in a day or two. Let me know if
you want me to do this.

2) The one thing that I think needs to pop more in the paper is the
novelty and importance of having replicated networks on each tree
genotype. As far as I know no one has done this before. All the
community genetics network and cooccurrence stuff you have done so far
has built single networks across the replicate trees of a genotype, so
the network for a genotype was not replicated and the inferences is
somewhat different. Here you made individual networks for each tree,
so you now have replication to measure heritability, and make direct
inference with statistical power about how genotype modulates network
structure. Somehow the importance of this needs to be made really
clear without degrading the importance of the past network papers. It
seems to me that bringing the network down to the level of genotype
makes a major contribution to the network literature by actually
linking the network to a scale that natural selection can act on; lots
of network stuff talks about evolution but it is always sampled at the
level of species and so makes major assumptions about the evolutionary
implications that it doesn’t every actually test. I think this point
could be made more strong in the 1st paragraph of the intro and then
reemphasized in more depth in the discussion. On the other side of
things, by sampling at the level of replicated genotypes, you most
fully bring the network perspective into the field of community
genetics, which likes to talk about communities of interacting species
being influenced by host genotype but rarely measures the interactions
(except in a limited set of trophic interaction papers). This point
could be more strongly emphasized in the 2nd paragraph of the Intro.
You provide a nice demonstration and a strong computational approach
to specifically going after interaction networks structure in a
community genetics context. So, the results fully bring together two
different fields and in doing so provides powerful novel reciprocal
insights.

3) With regards to feedback, I don’t think the lichens likely have any
impact on tree fitness. It would be nice if we could argue that they
might, but generally I suspect most lichenologists would argue that
they probably don’t affect the tree and are basically commensalists
benefitting from the tree as substrate while doing nothing good or bad
for the tree. However, although the statistical networks are built
just with lichens, the individual trees that host them are part of the
network in the larger sense (like a central hub that everything in the
network interactions with). Its like the tree is the foundation
species within its individual tree-lichen network, and changes in
genetics among trees cause shifts in the network structure. This is
awesome because it suggest that if any sort of natural selection
favors some tree genotypes over other (for reasons that are not
directly related to the actions of lichens themselves), some lichen
interaction network structures may be favored over others. By being
sensitive to tree genotype, the lichen community networks are like
passive riders on the waves of evolutionary dynamics that occur within
the tree species they inhabit. We show this with lichens but the
potential is that this could happen for networks of all sorts of
organisms that form around foundation species.

4) I would emphasize heritability in the Results more and deemphasize
the R2, since I think the heritability has more statistical
validity. It would be useful to put Supplemental table 1 in the main
text.

5) It wasn’t clear to me if the interactions are positive or negative
or if the direction is not really quantified in your methods. Could
you speak to that more in the paper? Could we quantify positive vs
negative interactions?


The National Academy of Sciences is such an odd thing to me. There are
several people who really seem like they should be part of it but
somehow aren’t. It seems to also have a bias towards people at
prestigious places despite the fact that fantastic groundbreaking work
is often done at the public schools of “lesser” status. I think that
we should at minimum get John N Thompson to give us a friendly review
before we submit, or perhaps more useful, is to suggest him as a
reviewer when we submit since we know he is into this type of stuff
and would likely give a favorable review. In addition to Rudolfo, what
about Hal Mooney? Tom, for some reason I recall maybe you had some
contact with him. Or, maybe I figment that right out of my
imagination.


Best
Jamie

<TGW 05March2019>

Hi Matt and Jamie, Sorry for the delay in going over the manuscript.
We just finished a marathon of grant writing on 3 proposals that has
been very time consuming.  As you know I like this paper a lot and
feel it should go in a high profile journal.  Rodolfo Dirzo might be
considered as a National Academy of Sciences member who might consider
conveying this for us.  John N. Thompson is, as far as I can
determine, not a member.  Matt, what about the Thompson at Harvard
Forest?
 
I think the science comes across well (except for the results
paragraphs that are long lists of statistical findings) and so for me
the major issue that I think we are weak on is, what does it all mean
and why is it so important?  I really think we need to focus on this
in the abstract, merit box, intro and discussion sections.  In my
opinion, showing that interaction networks are genetically based
clearly raises the potential for them to subject to natural selection
and to be evolved traits of plants that are heritable.  I think a
major issue in this case with lichens is whether or not lichens can
feed back to affect plant performance or whether they are responding
to bark traits that have evolved for other reasons, and the lichen
responses are passive.  I don’t know if there is a literature on
lichens influencing their host plants in some way, but I think we need
to cover this.  The fact that lichens are limited and defined in part
by a genetics-based functional plant trait argues that selection on
that trait can influence lichen interaction networks and the evolution
of lichen communities.  I think it is crucial for a high profile
journal to raise such issues and discuss their implications. I feel
that many readers will be surprised that plant genetics could have
such an effect on an epiphyte community and will find this very
interesting, so we need to explore it specifically and its broader
implications with or without feedbacks.  I will be out of town for two
weeks beginning March 13 and am happy to go back and forth on these
implications as needed.  Thanks for all your hard work on this; I
think it is getting close.  I’ve also attached a recent paper of ours
with Kitty as the lead author that came out on PNAS.  In this paper
the methods go after the discussion and not before the results as you
have done.  It might be a good model for the formatting of our paper.
Hope this helps and I look forward to hearing from you.  Please
confirm receipt as the file size might get rejected by our server.

Cheers, Tom
